---
layout: post
title: "Considerations for Choosing Physical or Digital Games on the PlayStation 5"
date:   2024-02-10 06:04:12 +0000
categories: ['News','Gaming']
excerpt_image: https://media.juiceonline.com/2020/06/ETaXNhWXsAAYlf3.jpg
image: https://media.juiceonline.com/2020/06/ETaXNhWXsAAYlf3.jpg
---

## **Storage Space Requirements for Massive Game Install Sizes**
One major consideration for choosing between physical and digital games on the PlayStation 5 is storage space requirements. As games continue to get larger in size due to improved graphics and more content, storage becomes a critical factor which format to choose. **The PS5 only supports playing games installed on its internal solid state drive (SSD)**, meaning storage needs to be carefully managed no matter what.
Games these days routinely take up 50GB or more of storage just for the base installation. With a standard PS5 having only 667GB of usable space, that leaves room for maybe 10 large games or so. Opting for all-digital means being limited to that storage unless opting to upgrade to larger capacity internal SSD drives like 1TB or 2TB models, or using high-capacity external USB hard drives of 4TB, 6TB or larger. 
physical discs potentially save storage space by only requiring installations of around 50-100GB max and allowing easy switching out of discs. However, many people still prefer digital for the convenience of not having to swap discs. **Overall storage capacity needs depend highly on individual gaming habits and library sizes.** For hardcore multi-gamers, investing in ample additional storage seems necessary.
## **Resale and Sharing Value of Physical Disc Ownership**
Another factor in physical vs digital is the ability to resell or share games. Opting for the physical discs format grants ongoing ownership that digital lacks. Once downloaded digitally, games are permanently tied to the purchasing account. **However, physical discs can be resold or loaned to friends once finished with**, recouping some money back or allowing others to experience the game. 
GameStop and other used game stores have long profited off the resale value of prior-generation console games. And friends frequently share games by passing around physical discs. **This social aspect of physical media is a huge bonus for many gamers.** Not having the option to resell or share freely is a definite limitation of digital that persists between console generations.
## **Redownload Risks if Digital Platforms Shut Down** 
A long-term concern about digital games is what happens if platforms like the PlayStation Store eventually shut down servers in 10-20 years. Once that occurs, any digitally purchased games in a player's library **would effectively become inaccessible and unplayable going forward if not actively installed on their console or PC.** This risk of not being able to redownload is a real consideration for digital longevity.
Physical discs have no such risk inherently, as the games will continue to be playable indefinitely through use of the discs alone, no online connection required. As consoles and online services reach end-of-life over time, having access to a physical game library ensures ongoing enjoyment even when digital access points shut down. All purchased assets stay accessible, versus digital games potentially becoming lost media with no redownload option. 
Many point out that major publishers likely keep digital game libraries available far into the future for copyright and financial reasons. But smaller, niche, or older titles from publishers who have shut down do seem like they could be lost more easily compared to physical. This longevity argument remains a valid point for weighing physical versus digital.
## **Performance Impacts of Huge Digital Game Libraries** 
Another concern is the potential performance impacts on the PlayStation Store and consoles themselves from housing monumentally large digital libraries over time. An **ever-expanding game collection in a player's download list and hard drive could slowlybog down the interface navigation and storage access speeds.** 
When a new PlayStation account is created with no purchased games, the UI and store feel snappy since there is little stored on the system. But for people amassing dozens or hundreds of digital titles, that data bloat may eventually lower experience quality if not improved on by Sony. Things like store search/browse speed, game library organization, and installation/upgrade times are all aspects that could decline as digital footprints grow extremely large over many years.
For comparison, physical media has fixed overhead regardless of library size. Disk read speeds stay consistent as well. As digital libraries scale to gargantuan sizes, will technology advance quick enough for Sony to keep up optimal performance? Only time will tell, but it's a variable that tends to favor physical in terms of maintaining consistent experience over the long haul.
## **Developer Resources Limit Game Re-releases and Remasters** 
When considering game access and availability long-term, an important aspect is how likely remasters, re-releases or backwards compatibility will be supported between console generations. While big franchises seem reliably re-released every new generation, the reality is that **modern development studios and publishers have finite time, budgets and staffing available.**
Once work wraps up on initial games and any expansions, most development teams move onto new projects instead of going back to old IPs. Even for the most requested remasters and re-releases, the business case has to stack up against other potential new games to be greenlit. As a result, many titles fall through the cracks of never getting revived. 
For games from now defunct development companies, the challenge is even greater. Without access to original source code and assets, **true remasters become much more difficult and expensive propositions compared to superficial ports or “spiritual successors.”** Physical discs provide certainty that at minimum, the original game will always be playable on future hardware through backward compatibility.
## **The Convenience of Digital versus Control of Physical Media**
When weighing physical versus digital, there is also the balance of convenience versus control that gamers must consider. Digital game marketplaces and delivery have made gaming dramatically more convenient overall. Titles can now be purchased and downloaded in just minutes from any internet-connected device. There is no need to trek to stores or wait for shipments. 
Instant switching between dozens of titles in a library is also highly convenient compared to swapping out discs. However, this convenience comes at the cost of long-term ownership control. Digital games remain **permanent hostage to the platforms they are sold through, while physical discs grant ongoing access without external dependencies.** 
Once a physical disc is purchased, it cannot be remotely revoked like a digital license can theoretically. The game resin full control as a owned asset, while digital feels more akin to an ongoing service that could change policies. Some value convenience much more than control, but for others the tradeoff warrants physical media at least for a gaming core collection.
## **Internet Speed Factors into Digital Gaming Experience**  
As games push technological boundaries with higher resolutions, richer assets and massive online components, digital distribution raises considerations around internet speeds. Even on consoles with fast internal storage, download times become a major factor. Customers on slower broadband plans may find downloadable patches become a regular disruption and frustration.
Games targeting high resolutions like 4K and beyond also require significant bandwidth for digital versions over physical. **Titles pushing 100GB+ installation sizes will take many hours or even days to download over DSL or satellite internet.** Rural and remote gamers in particular may prefer physical for this reason alone if wanting to avoid prolong download times marring the first-time experience.
Faster future internet standards like full fiber and wireless 5G aim to alleviate this concern as adoption grows. However, as of today download speeds remain a geographical and financial lottery. Physical media has the key advantage of allowing instant offline installation and play once the disc is inserted, no network dependency at all.
## **Weighing Financial Costs Physical Versus Digital**
When considering value for money between physical and digital on a new generation of consoles, the costs often favor digital once factoring various discounts and sales over time. New physical games usually carry a $60-$70 MSRP at launch, while most digital titles see a 10-20% discount straight from day one on platforms like the PlayStation Store. 
Further markdowns during seasonal sales can bring single player focused digital games down to $10-$30 regularly just months after release. For prolific online gamers, the savings added up from frequent digital deals is substantial versus waiting on physical price drops. However, physical games have their own ability to offset costs through resale or trade-ins to used game shops for partial returns.
Depending on individual gaming habits, tastes and library sizes, the financials shift between formats over the long run. While physical may carry a small initial premium, the resale option provides a recurring source of funds as games are rotated in and out. But for people playing dozens or hundreds of titles for years, digital bulk purchasing wins out monetarily long-term in many cases.
In summary, there is no definitively right choice between physical and digital on PS5 - the decision depends heavily on individual priorities and situation. But it helps to have a nuanced view of bothsides when weighing considerations from storage to performance, ownership to cost, as online and offline gaming continue evolving hand in hand each generation. An ideal compromise may be combining both formats tailored to specific purposes.